>>LISA GARR: Hi, I'm Lisa Garr,
host of "Gaiam Inspirations."
And we are broadcasting from
the Sounds True Wake Up Festival
at the beautiful
YMCA of the Rockies
in Estes Park, Colorado.
And our current
technology-loving culture
may value youth as being wise.
And many jobs are going to
the younger demographic.
However, according to my
guest, an enrolled member
of the Lakota tribe,
Joseph Marshall III,
he says, there are wise
people in the world,
from all walks of life, from
many nations and cultures.
But there is one
unalterable reality.
No one who is truly
wise is young.
Welcome.
>>JOSEPH MARSHALL: Thank you.
>>LISA: Thank you
for being here.
>>MARSHALL: Thank you.
>>LISA: Tell me, what do you
feel about how we're treating
our elders, in terms of
our society these days?
>>MARSHALL: Not good,
not good at all.
We put them out
to pasture, which
is a common phrase
that people use.
And it's a convenient
phrase, but it's also
very sad one, as far
as I'm concerned,
because it implies
that we no longer have
any use for the old people.
>>LISA: And the
wisdom that comes
from elders, from
all of our elders,
is so vast and so wonderful.
But our technology
age is moving so fast
that often that
wisdom is discounted.
>>MARSHALL: It is.
>>LISA: Why.
>>MARSHALL: I think we're
too enamored with the present
moment and what we can
do with our technology.
And we forget that
our grandparents, even
some of our parents, who have
lived 50, 60, 70 years or more
have not just a lot of
wisdom, but a lot of-- not
a lot of knowledge, but
a lot of wisdom because
of all those years of just
having survived those years.
They've gained a
lot of experience,
and that counts for
something, and that's
what we forget about.
>>LISA: Yeah, we
forget about it,
because we are moving so fast.
But that's part
of your mission is
to bring the information
forward and to keep it
and the traditions alive.
>>MARSHALL: Yes,
that's what I do.
>>LISA: That's what you do.
So what are some
of the traditions
that you want us
to know the most?
Share with us.
>>MARSHALL: Well there's a lot.
You know, without divulging
too many intimate secrets,
it's not so much tradition.
It's values, values of respect,
compassion, humility, courage,
all those things
that are actually
at the core of a
lot of cultures.
But I grew up
knowing those values
because my grandparents who
raised me not only taught them,
but they lived those values.
So in addition to
all the other things,
such as traditions and customs,
that's what I try to teach.
And those things have a place
in the world, even today.
>>LISA: Let's break them down,
if you can, because they're
very important--
respect, passion.
What was the other two?
>>MARSHALL: Humility,
wisdom, generosity, courage,
fortitude--
>>LISA: So respect--
respecting each other?
>>MARSHALL: Respecting each
other, respecting everything
around us-- it's not just
human to human relationship.
It's everything
else in the world.
We say, everyone else, and
that implies human beings.
And that's OK.
But everyone else also includes
all other forms of life,
whether it's trees or animals.
And they deserve respect
too, because they're alive,
just as much as we are.
>>LISA: Yes, and there's
a phrase that you have.
You could say it.
>>MARSHALL: Mitakuye oyasin,
which means all my relatives,
all my relations.
>>LISA: And is that what you
mean by relating to everything?
>>MARSHALL: Exactly.
>>LISA: All my relations.
>>MARSHALL: The Earth and
everything on it and in it.
>>LISA: Now passion, passion
being another value--
>>MARSHALL: Right.
>>LISA: Passion for life?
>>MARSHALL: For life.
>>LISA: Purpose?
>>MARSHALL: All those
things, for purpose,
for even the smallest things
that come into our path
as we go along.
It's, if you embrace
something with passion,
it becomes more
meaningful, even if it
lasts for just a little while.
>>LISA: Well, let's talk
about that, if we can,
for something that you
have passion about,
but it can't manifest.
Or someone you love, that
you have passion for,
who passes away.
It gets diminished a
little, doesn't it,
when those things happen?
>>MARSHALL: Yeah, it does.
And it can, if you allow it.
But that's why we have memories.
And you can be passionate about
a person, an event, a thing,
a place.
And maybe you don't go
to that place anymore,
or you leave that place.
Or someone passes in your life.
That doesn't mean you
leave those behind.
That's when you relegate
them to your memories.
And I remember going to a
wake with my grandparents
when I was probably five or six.
It was a new experience for me.
I saw the person
lying in a casket.
And of course, they had died,
and they weren't moving.
And they'd looked like
the person I knew,
but I knew it was-- there
was something different.
So I asked my grandfather,
where is she now.
Where is that person now?
And so he touched my
chest and my head saying,
that person is now lives in
your heart and your mind.
So when you learn
those things, then you
can rekindle that passion for
what that person was to you.
>>LISA: But you can't
hold on to them.
You can't touch them.
>>MARSHALL: And that's
just the way it is.
That's a reality
of the situation.
I mean, that's why we
feel sad, because we can't
hold onto them,
can't touch them.
We can't talk to them.
That's where sadness
and mourning comes in.
That's part of the process.
But memory can help with
a little bit of that.
>>LISA: It's part of
process is the mourning.
It takes a while to grieve.
>>MARSHALL: Right.
>>LISA: Yes.
How long do you think?
I mean, I know there's not
a certain amount of years,
but how do you go through
that grieving process
without disabling your life?
>>MARSHALL: I don't know.
That's a tough question.
And I think we all go
through it as individuals.
And it all depends
on what we were
taught as young people,
what our societies
and what our cultures
talk about or teach us,
as far as life and death.
My particular
culture, the Lakota,
we are not afraid to talk
about death, because it's
a part of the cycle of being
born, living our lives,
being children, being
adults, and being old people.
Then we die.
And we're taught that.
That's what is coming.
There's no way to
change that reality,
and so there's no use
to be afraid of it.
Why be afraid of it?
It's going to happen.
>>LISA: That is a great thing.
Most of us live and
live with our loved ones
like they're never going
to die and-- absolutely.
>>MARSHALL: This culture--
this mainstream culture
denies death.
>>LISA: Definitely, definitely.
>>MARSHALL: But no matter
how much you deny it,
it's going to happen.
Whereas, we are
taught, it is coming.
And it is the ultimate truth.
And you embrace that truth.
And it doesn't lessen the pain.
>>LISA: Right.
>>MARSHALL: But it
helps you understand
what the process is all about.
>>LISA: Yeah, maybe
the shock or the--
>>MARSHALL: Right.
>>LISA: Yeah, absolutely.
>>MARSHALL: This is going to
happen, and it has happened.
>>LISA: To learn that at such
a young age is very valuable.
>>MARSHALL: Exactly,
and you live with it
the rest of your life.
>>LISA: Let's talk
about courage.
>>MARSHALL: Courage.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>MARSHALL: Courage is
not the absence of fear.
Courage is doing something,
in spite of fear.
Whether you feel
up to it or not,
you take that first shaky
step into doing something.
And one of the
first things-- one
of the things that I didn't like
to do as a child and in school
was to talk in front of people.
And when I was in high
school, I took a speech class.
I had to.
And so the first test was to
give a three-minute speech.
And that was one of the most
terrifying moments of my life,
up to that point in my life.
And I did it in
spite of-- my parents
and my grandparents said,
well, you have to do.
It's required of you.
Have to do it.
So even though my
knees were shaking
and I wasn't sure I
could do it, I did it.
And that's courage.
All it takes is a
little ounce of effort.
>>LISA: I like what you said,
it's not the absence of fear.
>>MARSHALL: It is not
the absence of fear.
It's doing something
in spite of fear.
>>LISA: So you go towards it.
You lean into it.
>>MARSHALL: Right, right.
>>LISA: And then, the last
one you said was humility.
>>MARSHALL: Humility
is probably one
of the most important
virtues and values
that we are taught
as Lakota people.
There's a lot to
be humble about.
It's humbling to be alive,
to have that gift of life--
to be humble in the
presence of others.
And life itself and the Earth
itself, all those things
are vast and sometimes
incomprehensible.
And it teaches you humility,
that you're just one part of it
all.
And I admire people
who are humble.
In spite of the
fact that they might
have done all kinds
of things, might
have accomplished many
great things in their lives,
to be humble about it,
not to brag about it.
>>LISA: They don't wear
it on their sleeves.
>>MARSHALL: No.
I admire people like that.
>>LISA: Yeah, it definitely
takes-- those successes,
even though you're
proud of them,
to put them in your back pocket
and move forward, for me,
it's about contribution.
The more I can
contribute, for me,
that's what-- That's
how I love to live.
And we're going to take a look
Joseph talking about the Lakota
way.
Take a look.
-[SPEAKING LAKOTA]
My name is Joseph Marshall,
and I'm Rosebud Sioux.
I grew up on a Sioux Indian
reservation in the 1950s,
during a time when
they were still
a lot of traditional families.
And many of those traditional
families spoke Lakota.
And many of the elderly
members of those families
had stories to tell,
especially in the winter time
or at some social gathering.
Invariably, when
people got together,
some elderly person would
call the children together
and tell stories about culture,
about history, about ancestors.
And those kinds of
stories were the basis
for my book, "The Lakota Way."
I wanted to show,
to demonstrate,
that the Lakota culture is a
vibrant, alive culture today
and that it has a
connection to the past.
And so the virtues
that I write about
are just as applicable
today as they ever were.
There are a lot of books
out on the market today
written by non-Indians,
with titles like,
"The Last of the Mohicans" or
"The Last Days of the Sioux
Nation," which imply those
cultures or those tribes
no longer exist.
And nothing can be
further from the truth.
Certainly, Lakota still exists.
And in fact, we exist in greater
numbers than we did before.
We exist today
within the structure
of the dominant society, the
dominant American society.
But we haven't entirely
forgotten who we are
and what we are.
So the stories in
"The Lakota Way"
come from that identity of
ourselves as a Lakota people.
There were very few
radios when I was a boy,
and of course, no televisions.
And Lakota was the
predominant language.
Stories were entertainment
and education.
And they were the
mechanism by which
the Lakota culture
perpetuated itself.
The storytellers in my
childhood were the grandmothers
and grandfathers
who had lived life
and learned a thing or two
from living and from stories.
I come from an oral
tradition, and as the author
of a book, who sits down at
a computer or at a typewriter
and bangs out words, that's
one way of telling a story.
But because I come
from an oral tradition,
it stood to reason--
it made a lot of sense
to take some of the stories
from this latest book
and put them on CD.
Because it gives
me an opportunity
to be that oral storyteller.
[SPEAKING LAKOTA]
>>LISA: As I mentioned, I had
a friend who was indoctrinated,
so to speak, in
the Lakota tribe.
And I learned a little
bit from being with her.
They embraced her as she
was going through leukemia
and helped her with her
passing, so that she
got to the end of her life
in such a beautiful way,
in such a wonderful way.
It was so memorable for me.
So I really appreciate your
tribe and your culture.
And so there's an
article that you
wrote for the "Huffington Post."
And I wanted to go through some
of the points in the article.
One of them was, "Wisdom always
takes the path of reason."
So I've done some pretty
stupid things in my life.
>>MARSHALL: We all have.
>>LISA: I did not
have that wisdom.
So how do you take the
wisdom over-- I mean,
is it just through
trial and error?
>>MARSHALL: Absolutely.
I mean, nothing ever goes the
way we want it or expect it to.
Nothing is ever
perfect in our lives.
And we learn from our mistakes.
That's where wisdom comes from.
It comes from our
mistakes, and it
comes from learning from others.
And it's easy to say, once
we-- to provide a lesson,
once we've made a mistake, then
we have a very solid foundation
from which to speak,
because we've been there.
And sometimes, we do
make the right decisions.
And that's another
reason to be wise.
>>LISA: Or the right decision
is made, within the mistakes.
>>MARSHALL: Exactly.
>>LISA: Like there's
one gem in the rough.
>>MARSHALL: Right.
>>LISA: Yeah.
I think, part of the
wisdom in the elder part
is that we've made so many
mistakes up to this point.
>>MARSHALL: Absolutely, right.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>MARSHALL: It's sort of
akin to the adage, "Whatever
doesn't kill you will
make you stronger."
>>LISA: And give you humility.
>>MARSHALL: Right.
All your mistakes are the
foundation for lessons.
They are the lessons.
>>LISA: OK, another guideline--
"A wise person never
speaks before immersing
himself or herself
in a long, thoughtful moment,"
which I notice that you do.
You shorten it a little
because of the interview.
>>MARSHALL: Right, I
mean it's-- exactly.
Don't let your mouth run off,
before your thoughts catch up
with it.
And there's nothing wrong
with gathering your thoughts,
because you want to
say the right thing.
You want to impart
the right information.
You want to provide the
right kind of wisdom
or answer the question
in the right way.
>>LISA: My husband is like that.
He takes his time
to answer things.
And I jump in, because I've
got this busy mind, I jump in,
and I answer it for him.
And it bugs him.
He really likes to take
his time, and you as well.
Is this something
that you practice?
>>MARSHALL: No.
I probably do, probably
subconsciously,
more than I realize.
But it's the example set by my
parents and my grandparents.
>>LISA: So you were
raised like this.
>>MARSHALL: I was
raised that way,
with people who were very
careful about what they said,
took the time to think.
>>LISA: Is there a process
that people in your community
go through, young generation.
When they turn 13 or they
move into being a young adult,
is there still a-- an
indoctrination or ceremony,
anything that, when you become
a teenager, in your community?
>>MARSHALL: It is
still, for girls.
>>LISA: OK, good.
>>MARSHALL: It's a
coming-out ceremony,
it's a puberty ceremony.
>>LISA: What's it called?
>>MARSHALL: It's a
puberty ceremony,
a coming-out ceremony.
When they reach
puberty, then they're
recognized by the community,
saying that you are now
a woman, and this is
your role in our family,
in our community.
And that's the way it was done.
It was more extensive in the
old days, pre-reservation days.
There was a large gathering.
And there was a feast.
And the young woman or
young women were identified,
and their families
were identified.
And it was their moment to
pass from being girls to women.
And it was a big
deal, because women
were the focal point of family.
Actually, they were the
focal point of the community.
They were the
nurturers, and they
were the first
teachers of children.
So it was important for
them to know their roles,
to have learned their
roles and then implement
what was expected of them.
>>LISA: Are there any modern
day ceremonies like that?
Does your tribe or anyone--
>>MARSHALL: Yeah, the
ceremony is still done,
maybe not to the extent that
it used to be in the old days.
Not as many families do it.
Those of us who are still
traditional, some families
do that still.
>>LISA: Do you do that for
other, say, other cultures?
Could you--
>>MARSHALL: Yeah,
we could, probably.
>>LISA: Religions have that.
But if you're not religious--
>>MARSHALL: Yeah, we could have.
I probably have seen one or
two that were done that way.
>>LISA: It's so lost in
the American culture.
>>MARSHALL: It is.
>>LISA: It's so lost.
I mean, it still exists
in Hispanic culture
and the Jewish faith,
many different religions.
But in the overarching
American culture--
>>MARSHALL: It isn't there.
>>LISA: No, it's been lost.
And I think it contributes
to many young women
today not understanding
their sexuality
or what to do with it or
the power that it yields.
If they understood the
power that it yields,
it would be more
protected and preserved.
My own personal opinion,
but I have a young girl.
So I get to look at
things like that.
Another guideline is, "Wisdom
is the most effective antidote
to fear and the
absence of reason."
>>MARSHALL: Right.
Wisdom is hard
earned, first of all.
I mean, you go through
so many experiences,
trying experiences,
trials and tribulations
and just experiencing everything
else that goes on around you,
in your path, in your life.
My father, for example, died at
the age of 77 of colon cancer.
But he was a veteran
of World War II.
He was a soldier.
He was in Okinawa.
And so just that
experience was the one
that forged him into a man.
And so for the rest of his
life, he could look back on that
and use that as a
source of wisdom,
because he survived
that experience.
>>LISA: What about the wounds
that he carried over from that,
as a vet?
>>MARSHALL: There were a
lot of wounds he carried.
And because of that,
he was an alcoholic,
and he drank for 40 years.
And I didn't know him as a
man, because of alcoholism.
But when he finally quit, I came
to see him as he really was.
He was a very kind,
compassionate, very
knowledgeable person that
could engage in conversations
about just about anything.
And I came to know him then.
>>LISA: And how old
was he at that point.
>>MARSHALL: I think he was in
his 60s, when he finally quit.
>>LISA: When he
finally quit, and you
got to know him all over again.
>>MARSHALL: Right.
>>LISA: Many people, of
course, our Vietnam veterans
and all veterans, carry
these torches over from war.
My father as well was a vet.
And it is something
that is so subtle
that isn't recognized as much.
It is more now.
But how do you deal with
that in your culture
and not go towards the alcohol?
>>MARSHALL: In the
pre-reservation days,
warriors were esteemed.
And the reason for
being a warrior,
a war fighter was necessary.
And sometimes, a warrior
had to do difficult things,
to put it mildly, on
behalf of defending
his family, his
community, his nation.
And the society
recognized that, so there
were rituals of cleansing
and accepting them
back into the community.
And there was one that was
done where a ceremony was set.
A day was appointed,
and all the warriors
went outside the village
with their weapons.
And they came a
certain distance,
and then they stopped.
And the laid down their weapons.
And everybody in the village
was waiting for them.
And they walked backwards
into the village,
meaning they left behind
all the things-- all
the terrible things
and their weapons.
And they walked
into the village.
And once they got
into the village,
they went into a sweat
lodge, many sweat lodges,
and they were cleansed
of all of that.
And then they were wiped down,
washed by their families.
And then their weapons
were smudged as well.
So their weapons were
cleansed as well.
>>LISA: That's a very intense
ceremony and important.
>>MARSHALL: Absolutely
>>LISA: And this
happened several times.
>>MARSHALL: Several times-- it
was a ceremony of forgiveness,
mainly of the warriors forgiving
themselves, just as importantly
as the people forgiving them.
>>LISA: What about
forgiving the war and all
that they had to fight for?
>>MARSHALL: It was all
part of the process.
That's part of life,
but sometimes we
have to put it in its place.
>>LISA: A few times, you
said, pre-reservation days.
>>MARSHALL: Right.
>>LISA: What do you
mean by that period?
>>MARSHALL:
Reservations, for us,
started about 1860s, when
the first Lakota were
taken to the areas around
Fort Robinson, Nebraska,
after some of them had
surrendered to white authority.
In 1877 is when we were moved
to western South Dakota.
And that's when the
reservations were established.
So when I mentioned
pre-reservation,
it was in a time before we
were relegated to reservations.
>>LISA: Let's talk
about this perspective,
about when the West was lost.
>>MARSHALL: How
the West was lost.
>>LISA: How West was lost.
>>MARSHALL: The overriding
perspective-- and there
was a movie titled,
"How the West Was Won."
It was a long, long movie.
And of course, it was
all from the perspective
of the Europeans.
And of course, natives
were in the movie.
But the theme was what
the mainstream society
did to win the West, because
they were the good guys.
And it espoused
mostly their virtues
and how-- what it
took to claim the land
and to make it into
what it is today.
But what it really
didn't talk about,
and what a lot of books
and novels and movies
don't talk about, is
what happened to us
on the other side.
How did we feel about
that whole process?
If the West was won for somebody
else, it was lost for our side.
Our lives were changed forever.
In the Oregon Trail
days, for 20 years,
350,000 white people
traveled from Missouri
to California and Oregon,
through many different--
the territories of
many different tribes.
That's mentioned in that way.
But it never talks about, well,
what happened to those people.
How did they feel about it?
If you can imagine along
the North Platte River,
where the Oregon Trail ran in
Wyoming, of Lakota men and boys
sitting on the ridges
watching the wagons
roll by, every summer, hundreds
and hundreds of wagons.
And you had to-- you had to know
that those men and boys were
wondering, well, who
are those people.
Why are they here?
Where are they going?
What's going to happen to them?
But the more
important question--
what's going to happen to us?
>>LISA: Right, as
they move into--
>>MARSHALL: As they
move into our lands,
what are they doing here?
Why do they want our land?
And in the process, our
buffalo was being killed,
were being wiped out.
>>LISA: Why, because
of the danger?
>>MARSHALL: No, the buffalo hide
hunters came and shot buffalo,
from long distances with
high caliber rifles.
Buffalo have a strange habit.
When one is killed,
they all gather around.
So the hide hunters
learned that habit.
So when they shot one, the
others would gather around,
and they would keep
shooting one after another.
>>LISA: Why was the
buffalo hide so valuable?
>>MARSHALL: It was used for
all kinds of things back East,
for rugs and so forth,
and the bones later on.
And the tongues were a delicacy.
And the rest of the
carcasses was discarded.
So those were the effects
of all those people coming.
And nobody ever talks
about how we felt about it.
There was a scene in the
movie "Dances with Wolves"
where the Lakota people
come on the carcasses of all
the dead buffalo that were
left behind, skinned carcasses.
That's sort of what
happened to us.
We were just sort of cast
aside by the whole concept
of Manifest Destiny and
the people moving West.
It wasn't good for us.
>>LISA: How did you feel?
What was going on?
What happened within the tribe?
>>MARSHALL: A lot of
feelings-- anger, sadness
and trying to change,
trying to stop it,
initially trying
to stop it, trying
to do something about it, but
there was no way to do that,
because there were too
many of those people
and not enough of us to mount
an effective resistance.
>>LISA: Plus, you lived in the
gentle way, with the Earth,
not taking over the Earth.
>>MARSHALL: Yeah, and there
was the opposing viewpoints.
Where our culture looked
at the Earth as a relative,
and we belonged to the Earth.
And the other side
looked at it as property,
as a commodity, something
to own and something
to use and discard.
>>LISA: Were there
ever omens at the time?
There was plague.
There were are many
different things that-- would
your culture look at as a
way of eradicating that.
But it was just too strong.
>>MARSHALL: It was
just too strong.
There were too many.
It was an issue of numbers.
We were taught in
history-- at least
I assumed from what I learned
in history, that the way
people thought of
themselves as better, that
was the main reason
they won and we lost.
But it wasn't that.
It was numbers.
They had more guns.
There was more
technology on their side.
In the mid-1800s, the American
population was 25 million.
And the Lakota population
was about 25,000.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>MARSHALL: And even all
the 60 tribes of the planes
only was about 300 thousand.
So the numbers were
not in our favor.
>>LISA: And do
you feel that that
has permeated the
culture ever since?
>>MARSHALL: In
many ways, it has.
>>LISA: Never
recovered from that.
>>MARSHALL: No, and we're
still, in many ways,
struggling with it.
We know what the history is.
We know what the outcome is.
And we know what we are, what
it has brought us to today.
But it's still a
struggle to deal
with the issue of
how it happened.
>>LISA: There's
still progression.
It's always, always happening.
>>MARSHALL: Always.
>>LISA: So what
advice could you offer
to people who feel that
their places are being taken,
their jobs are being
taken by younger people,
their houses are being
taken by large buildings?
>>MARSHALL: It's an
interesting question.
I don't know.
I don't think I'm
wise enough to come up
with an answer that is
going to satisfy everybody.
But there is one truth.
Change is inevitable.
Sometimes, though,
the change is forced.
It comes from a
perspective that we don't--
>>LISA: It's not the
right time for everyone.
>>MARSHALL: It's not
the right time ever.
So the only thing to
do is to deal with it.
There's a phrase in my
language that my parents
and grandparents
used a lot when I
complained about
how things were.
And that's what they would say,
they would throw it back at me
and say, that's
the way things are.
First of all, you accept it.
And then you decide what about
it you can change and what
about it you just can't.
And you work with what you can.
And if this is the way
it is for the moment,
then we deal with it
and look for a way
around it, through it,
over it, and just accept
it to begin with.
>>LISA: It's one of those
things that everyone
deals with in their own way.
Some get angry, fight against.
Some accept, go into depression.
Some work with
the change and try
to make their own way out of it.
It is true.
Change is always
going to happen.
>>MARSHALL: Right.
And the follow up advice would
be: nothing lasts forever.
>>LISA: That's true.
That is true.
Well, hopefully our Earth will.
>>MARSHALL: Well, we're
told it will probably
be several billion years
before it goes away.
Hopefully, that
will be the case.
>>LISA: Yeah.
We're here against
some glaciers that
have been here for hundreds
of thousands of years.
Yeah.
All right.
We're going to take another
look here at one of the stories
that Joseph tells
about his grandfather.
Take a look.
[CHANTING]
-[SPEAKING LAKOTA]
I am Sichangu Lakota, descended
from a people who were nomadic
hunters on the Northern
Plains of North America.
Because we developed a
strong spiritual relationship
with the bison or
buffalo, we called
ourselves Pte Oyate,
the Buffalo Nation.
There were seven
bands of the Lakota:
Ogalala, Sicangu, Hunkpapa,
Miniconjou, Sihasapa,
Itazipacola, and Oohenupa.
By 1850, we controlled
a territory larger
than most European
nations at the time.
My ancestors were proficient
hunters and warriors,
efficiently providing
a living for themselves
and defending family and nation.
For hundreds and
hundreds of years,
their primary weapon
for hunting and warfare
was this, a simple
but effective weapon
in the hands of a
proficient archer,
which was every Lakota
male by the age of 12.
Our mythology tells us that
the bow is a child of the moon,
and the arrow is a
child of the sun.
With the simple but
effective weapon,
especially after the
horse came, my ancestors
forged a strong culture
and thrived as the Buffalo
Nation. [CHANTING]
>>LISA: So you were
talking about your latest
book, the lessons in
resilience that you
learn from the bow and the
arrow and resistance really.
Can you talk to us a
little bit about that?
>>MARSHALL: Well, I
make bows and arrows.
>>LISA: You make them?
>>MARSHALL: Right.
And I use them.
I shoot them as often as I can.
>>LISA: You do?
What type of wood do
you make them out of?
>>MARSHALL: Ash--
any kind of hardwood,
flexible hardwood
is good for a bow.
And I learned it, obviously,
from my grandfather,
who made bows and arrows
and taught me the basics.
And I took it from there.
>>LISA: So you take a chunk
of wood, and you carve the--
>>MARSHALL: Yeah, you
take-- it's called a stave.
You harvest a tree that's
no larger than your forearm,
about six feet long.
You split it in two
or four, if you can.
And you let that cure
for several years.
And then you carve it.
You literally carve
it into a bow.
We are told that our
bow, our Lakota bow,
came to us from the moon.
And you see it all the time.
You've probably seen
it, and you don't know.
Every time you see
the thinnest sliver
of a new moon, that's our bow.
And if you look
at the shape, it's
tapered gracefully,
from end to end.
And so that's how
we make our bows.
And since the moon is
female, our bow is female.
And if you do it right,
if you make a right,
if it's good enough--
and hopefully,
after all these years,
I'm getting to the point
where I'm good
enough-- you can make
a bow that's very resilient.
You can use it time
after time after time.
Even no matter how
many times you bend it,
it will go back to
its original shape.
>>LISA: And it's flexible.
>>MARSHALL: It's
very, very flexible.
>>LISA: And so what
lessons in life
do you teach from
that flexibility?
>>MARSHALL: We need
to be flexible.
We need to adjust to
things that happen to us.
And just even if
something knocks us back,
we can return from that
knock down, as it were,
and just be resilient
like the bow is.
I mean, no matter how
many times you bend it,
it always wants to go back
to its original shape.
>>LISA: What about the arrow?
>>MARSHALL: The arrow comes from
the sun, the rays of the sun.
If you've seen the
sun's rays coming down
through a bank of clouds,
arrows need to be that straight.
So the moon gave us the bow.
The sun gave us the arrow.
So it's male and female.
One is not useful
with the other.
One doesn't fulfill its
purpose without the other.
But the arrow, in
order to be accurate,
has to be as straight
as you can make it.
It has to be perfectly straight.
So if it's not straight,
doesn't matter how strong
the bow is, it's not
going to hit the target.
>>LISA: And what do you
make the arrows out of?
>>MARSHALL: Arrows are made
out of stalks, slender stalks.
It could be the
branch of an ash tree.
Or it could be the willow stalk.
Or it could be
chokecherry stalk.
It has to be the right size, the
size of a man's little finger.
>>LISA: And what
about the point of it?
>>MARSHALL: In the beginning,
the points were stone.
There's a stone called flint.
It's pretty common
in North America.
And it's easy to flake.
You work it.
You break off a piece, and then
you, with pressure flaking it,
you shape the head.
That's a simple
way of describing
a complicated process.
But that's how it happens.
And then later on, of course,
when the Europeans came
and they brought
with them iron, then
we used iron for the
heads, for the points.
>>LISA: And that's
what the arrowhead is.
What is the symbolism
of the arrowhead?
>>MARSHALL: It's a point.
I mean, it's sharp.
And it's anything
that's straight.
And it symbolizes that
we have to go forward.
>>LISA: Yes.
So in your tradition,
in your culture, what
are the things
that you do today,
other than the
bow and the arrow,
that you carry through
to modern day society?
>>MARSHALL: Just by
trying to remember
what my grandparents
taught me and my parents,
not just my immediate
grandparents, but all
the people who were
Grandma and Grandpa to me
in the communities
where I grew up,
to remember what they taught
me and to live those values
as much as I can.
I go to ceremonies.
>>LISA: You do, still?
>>MARSHALL: I do.
I go to ceremonies.
>>LISA: Do you go to
the sweat lodges still?
>>MARSHALL: I do
sweat lodges, yes.
One of my nephews
is a medicine man,
so I like to go
to his ceremonies.
>>LISA: And participate--
>>MARSHALL: And participate--
>>LISA: Tell us about the
sweat lodges that you go to.
>>MARSHALL: Sweat lodge
is somewhat of a misnomer.
We call it the inipi.
It means sort of a rebirth.
Because you go in there, and
what it is, it's a wet sauna.
It's a dome-shaped structure.
It's not very high.
And it can hold up to 20 people.
And there's a center pit.
And inside that pit is where
the stones are brought in
from the outside,
from the outside fire
pit where the stones are heated.
And they're brought in.
And then the door is closed.
The door is usually to the west.
And it's dark inside.
And water-- the
medicine man pours
the water over the stones.
And it gets very,
very hot inside.
And it's a wet sauna.
And there's usually four
rounds of prayers and singing.
And everybody who sits in
there has an opportunity
to make a statement,
say a prayer,
say the reason he
or she is there.
And then, the doors open, and
we're given a brief respite.
And then the door is closed.
And we do that four times.
And it's very refreshing.
You sweat.
It's a wet sauna, so
you sweat profusely.
So what you're
doing symbolically
is getting rid of a
lot of negativity.
>>LISA: And the prayers are
around whatever the intention
is of that--
>>MARSHALL: Each person is
there for a different reason.
Or it could be for
one specific reason
that everybody is
participating in.
But usually, people come
and have particular cares
and concerns that
they pray about.
>>LISA: And you come and
pray for-- have there
been recent ones
that have ever been
about the environment
or the Earth?
>>MARSHALL: Yes.
Sometimes, yes, that happens.
>>LISA: And sweat
lodges got a bad name,
of course, when they
had the incident that
happened to that one
particular gentleman.
But that was, in your way,
different from what you do,
right?
>>MARSHALL: Oh, yeah.
To us, it's not a contest
of a how hot it can get.
It's not at all.
No, it had nothing
to do with that.
>>LISA: You take breaks when
you need to take breaks.
>>MARSHALL: Yes.
>>LISA: But it's
about the intentions.
>>MARSHALL: It's the
intentions, yeah.
>>LISA: In the
case that I did it,
there was our-- my
friend in the center.
And she was being prayed
over and chanted and sung to,
and so forth.
>>MARSHALL: Yeah, the songs
are to invite the spirits in.
And then, when it's
over, the songs
are to thank the
spirits for coming,
that happen to be there.
>>LISA: And it wasn't
actually hot from the coals.
It's just because of the room
and the energy that flowed
and the drums and the
singing, and it's really
a beautiful experience.
>>MARSHALL: It is.
>>LISA: It's a
wonderful experience.
Any other types of things
that you bring forward
into today's society
from your culture?
>>MARSHALL: Just by being aware
of the environment, the Earth,
and this is the class
I'm teaching here.
It's about the Earth
and how to live
the sacred reality
of Mother Earth
and trying to live that way.
>>LISA: [COUGHING] I'm
sorry, what was that?
>>MARSHALL: Trying
to live that way
and not do harm to the Earth.
Those are things
that, again, I learned
from the community I grew
up in, from my grandparents
and their contemporaries.
>>LISA: Wonderful.
Now, there's another picture
that I want to show your here
or a video of keep going.
Take a look at this, and we'll
talk about it in a second.
-Keep going-- a young man
asked his Lakota grandfather
what the answer was to
life's difficulties.
[SPEAKING LAKOTA], said
the old man, "keep going."
And then he said, "there
are many realities in life,
such as joy and sadness,
winning and losing, standing
and falling, plenty and
hunger, and good and bad.
But the ultimate reality
is that life is a journey.
And sometimes you
walk it in sunlight
and sometimes in shadow."
None of us asked to be
born, but we are here.
And we must walk our
journey with our strengths
and our weaknesses.
Within each of us
is the will to win,
as well as the
willingness to lose.
Or to put it another way, the
determination to face life
or the fear to
turn away from it.
Life is not always easy.
There are difficulties,
storms if you will,
that bring loss, setbacks,
sadness, heartache,
and disappointments
of every kind.
But every storm,
every difficulty,
can also teach us to be strong.
To learn to be strong,
we must stand and face
the storms and difficulties
that life throws at us.
It means crying when we need to.
But it also means to
keep looking for answers,
to keep hoping.
It means to survive this moment
and the next and the next,
until the darkness
passes, and the sun
rises again, as it always will.
Life's journey is
like climbing a hill.
To reach the top, we must
do it one step at a time.
We should always remember
that the smallest or weakest
or slowest step
toward the sunrise,
toward hope, toward
the top of the hill,
is stronger than any
storm or difficulty.
And we should never forget that
the secret to determination
is to keep going, no
matter how weary we may be
or no matter what faces us.
Above all, we must keep going.
>>LISA: So you
lecture today, and you
carry on the legacy
from your culture.
In what way?
You said, the lecture today
specifically was around health?
>>MARSHALL: Around how
to regard the Earth.
>>LISA: Oh, the
Earth-- I'm sorry.
Can I start that again?
Sorry.
>>MARSHALL: Sure, sure.
>>LISA: So you lecture
around the country.
And what is your purpose
with the lectures?
What is it that you
hope to bring forward?
>>MARSHALL: To create an
awareness about my culture
and the history of my
people, because there are not
many of us.
There are more of
us now than used
to be in the
pre-reservation days.
In the 1800s, there may
have been 25,0000 of us.
Now, our Lakota population
is probably around 70,000.
But in terms of in comparison
with all the other people
in the world, there
is not many of us.
And we don't have a
lot of political clout.
So are-- we need to fall back on
awareness from people like you
and the mainstream of society.
The more you know
about us, the more
you'll hopefully understand us.
And maybe you will agree
with some of the things
that we try to
espouse as a culture.
>>LISA: As we maybe
drive along a highway
and we see "Indian
reservation" along the side,
what would you like people to do
when they see the reservations?
>>MARSHALL:
Understand that we are
like anybody else in
many, many respects.
And many of us do
want to hold on to who
we are, our identity, our
languages, our traditions,
our customs, and our land.
We have to have resources to
survive in this environment--
capitalistic environment.
And we need industry
and jobs and things
on every reservation,
everywhere,
whether it's on the East or
West coast or in the middle.
So we're like any
other group of people.
But we're very nationalistic in
that we have a sense of pride
in who we are and what we are
and a pride in our history
and our values and our customs.
>>LISA: So to appreciate,
respect those customs
and cultures, if we were
to enter into a reservation
or in any way be a
part of it-- what
do you feel about
the casinos that
are being built on
the reservations?
>>MARSHALL: I think that
they can do a lot of good.
And that was the intent,
when they were started,
is to bring an income that
we can turn around and bring
in some economic benefit
or social benefit
to our own people.
>>LISA: Were they
designated certain areas?
Was there a decision
that was made
amongst the Native
American culture
that there would be a
certain amount of them?
Or is it an individual--
>>MARSHALL: It's
pretty much left up
to each individual tribe
to work out agreements
with the federal government
and with the states.
>>LISA: And how do
the tribes get along,
the Lakota and the Chumansh and
all of the different tribes,
still getting along very--
>>MARSHALL: Now, we get along.
It wasn't always the
case, in the old days.
But now, we have to deal with
the same kinds of issues--
economic development,
health, education, housing.
We have to deal
with all of those,
so we band together and
try to work together.
>>LISA: When there's a
ceremony of a wedding--
and you say that your
tribe is now about 70,000,
does that mean they're pure
Lakota to Lakota marriages?
>>MARSHALL: No, not necessarily.
>>LISA: Not necessarily.
>>MARSHALL: My
wife was Norwegian.
>>LISA: OK, Norwegian.
>>MARSHALL: She was of
Norwegian heritage, yes.
>>LISA: And that
doesn't matter, though.
You embrace all culture.
>>MARSHALL: It
didn't matter to me.
>>LISA: No, of course.
>>MARSHALL: It didn't
matter to my family, either.
>>LISA: Yeah, so embracing all
cultures is still, of course--
>>MARSHALL: There's a lot of
intermarriage between natives
and non-natives and natives
in other native tribes.
I have a son who's
married to a Navajo.
And so my grandson is part
Navajo and part Lakota.
>>LISA: Oh, wonderful.
And in their
birthing process, did
they have a certain ceremony
other than-- something
that you could share with us?
>>MARSHALL: The
birthing process?
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>MARSHALL: Yeah, different
tribes treat it different ways.
Usually, the-- among
us, there was a teepee
that was set apart
from the village.
And that's where a woman who's
about to give childbirth,
she was taken there by all the
other women and the midwife.
And she was assisted
in her birth.
And they did their rituals and
ceremonies and prayers, usually
do the sweat before the birth.
>>LISA: Before the
birth, the mother does?
>>MARSHALL: Yeah.
>>LISA: And the father?
>>MARSHALL: Right.
>>LISA: That's wonderful.
What is the intention?
You put out for, of
course, healthy child.
Is there--
>>MARSHALL: Just to pray for
the child, pray for the mother,
pray for the child
and hope that they
have a good life ahead of them.
>>LISA: Yes.
And what is it that you want to
share with us, going forward?
Is there any particular
message or ceremony
that you'd like
to share with us?
>>MARSHALL: One very important
thing-- we're still here.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>MARSHALL: And hopefully,
we'll be around for a long time,
as part of now a global
community, because we're
so in constant
touch with everybody
else, instant touch
with everybody else.
So we want to be part of the
world, and we're still here.
We have things to offer.
We have values.
We have ceremonies, from
a very viable culture,
that we can share with the
world, if the world chooses.
>>LISA: If the world
chooses-- is there anything
that we can do, in terms of,
even though we don't have
the heritage and the
history of ceremony--
I keep asking about ceremony.
When you have pressure,
stress, financial issues,
do you ever set intentions
through ceremony around that?
Do you have a daily ritual?
>>MARSHALL: I
meditate every day,
if it's nothing more
that just sit and think
about what the situation
is or what I'm facing
or what I have to go through.
And more than that,
I try to meditate
as much-- as often as I can.
And I take part in a sweat
lodge as often as I can,
because I can take my
troubles and my cares there.
And people of any culture
can do that sort of thing.
It isn't going to
make you a Lakota.
>>LISA: But you make a place
to get rid of the troubles
and the--
>>MARSHALL: Right.
>>LISA: Yeah, that's
very important,
especially with
today's stress, even
just to take the time
to do the meditation.
And your way, you do
it through the culture
that you bring forward and
the books and the movies.
Have you ever been
in any of the movies
as a Lakota tribe member.
>>MARSHALL: Yes, I was.
I was in "Into the West."
There was a TV mini-series.
I played the part
of a medicine man.
>>LISA: Part of a medicine man?
How do you feel about the
way that Native Americans
are depicted in films?
>>MARSHALL: It's mixed
emotion sort of a thing.
Sometimes, some
movies do a good job
of trying to portray
correctly history
and culture and
those kind of things.
And up until the
1980s, probably,
every movie that
portrayed natives
was incorrect in
some way or another.
>>LISA: Yeah, in what
way, just so we know?
>>MARSHALL: Just
the way we dressed,
the way we talked,
where we lived.
Navajos didn't live in teepees.
Navajos lived in hogans,
but sometimes they
were portrayed as
living in teepees.
>>LISA: They live in what?
>>MARSHALL: Hogans, a
round earthen structure.
>>LISA: Abode structure.
>>MARSHALL: Right.
>>LISA: Well, there's
so much to learn still.
And a lot of it's being
taught through history
in schools, which is good.
Hopefully, it's being
taught the right way.
>>MARSHALL: Yes, one hopes.
>>LISA: But it's great to have
books now that we can access.
And the stories in your
books are wonderful.
>>MARSHALL: Great, thank you.
>>LISA: Thank you for
sharing your culture
with us, your
traditions with us.
And thank you for being here.
>>MARSHALL: I'm glad
to have been here.
>>LISA: Thank you so much.
If you'd like to watch
a replay of my interview
with Joseph Marshall, you
can go to gaiamtv.com.
And you can share it with
your friends as well.
And until next time, as always,
I invite you to stay inspired.
[MUSIC PLAYING]